N$16.00 WINDHOEK - 15 February 2024 No. 8308
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE
OF THE
REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA
CONTENTS
Page
GENERAL NOTICE
No. 84 Determination under the Payment System Management Act, 2023 ....................................................... 1
________________
General Notice
BANK OF NAMIBIA
No. 84											 2024
DETERMINATION UNDER THE PAYMENT SYSTEM MANAGEMENT
ACT, 2023
In my capacity as Governor of the Bank of Namibia (the Bank), and under the powers vested in the
Bank by virtue of section 45 of the Payment System Management Act, 2023 (Act No. 14 of 2023), I
hereby issue the Determination on the Licensing and Authorisation of Payment Service Providers in
Namibia (PSD-1), which Determination shall become effective on 15 February 2024.
J. !GAWAXAB
GOVERNOR
2 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 8308
DETERMINATION ON THE LICENSING AND AUTHORISATION OF PAYMENT
SERVICE PROVIDERS IN NAMIBIA
Arrangement of Paragraphs
PART I
PRELIMINARY
PARAGRAPH
1. Short Title
2. Application
3. Definitions
PART II
STATEMENT OF POLICY
4. Authorisation
5. Purpose
6. Position of the Bank
PART III
IMPLEMENTATION
7. Authorisation to offer payment services by banking institutions
8. Licensing process to offer payment services by non-bank financial institutions
9. Authorisation to offer payment services under an additional category
PART IV
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
10.1 Governance requirements
10.2 Appointment of board of directors and executives
10.3 Risk management and mitigation requirements
10.4 Consumer protection requirements
10.5 Contractual requirements
10.6 Capital requirements
PART V
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR PAYMENT SERVICES
11 Specific requirements for payment instrument issuers
12 Specific requirements for payment facilitators
13 Specific requirements for third-party payment service providers
14 Specific requirements for the issuance of virtual assets for purposes of facilitating payments
or transfers
PART VI
COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR PAYMENT SERVICE PROVIDERS
15. Compliance requirements for non-bank financial institutions
16. General compliance requirements for payment service providers
8308 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 3
PART VII
ADDITIONAL REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
17. Request for approval of significant changes to payment services
18. Notifications of significant changes to payment service
19. Interoperability
20. Surrender of the license or authorisation to offer payment services
21. Suspension of the license or authorisation to offer payment services
22. Revocation of the license or authorisation to offer payment services
23. Reporting
24. Administrative penalties
25. Repeals
26. Effective date
27. Enquiries
PART I: PRELIMINARY
1. Short Title – Determination on licensing and authorisation of payment service providers in
Namibia.
2. Application – This Determination will apply to all persons that intend to offer any of the
payment services listed in the Schedule of the Payment System Management Act, 2023 (Act
No. 14 of 2023) in Namibia.
3. Definitions – In this Determination, unless the context indicates otherwise, the words and
expressions used herein will have the same meaning assigned to them in the Payment System
Management Act, 2023 (Act No. 14 of 2023), and in the Banking Institutions Act, 2023 (Act
No. 13 of 2023), as amended, and cognate expressions will have corresponding meanings:
“Act” means the Payment System Management Act, 2023 (Act No. 14 of 2023);
“Administrative penalties” means a penalty determined by the Bank under section 40(1) of the Act;
“Bank” means the Bank of Namibia as referred to in section 2 of the Bank of Namibia Act, 2020 (Act
No. 1 of 2020);
“Beneficial owner”, in relation to a share, right or an interest held by any natural person or juristic
person in a payment service provider or payment system operator, means –
(a) a natural person who ultimately owns or effectively controls another person, includ-
ing the natural person on whose behalf the share, right or interest is held;
(b) a natural person who ultimately owns or exercises effective control over a juristic
person, and a natural person is considered to ultimately own or effectively exercise
control over a juristic person when that person
–
(i) owns or controls, directly or indirectly, including through
trusts or bearer shareholding for the payment service
provider or payment system operator, 25 percent or more
of the shares or voting rights of the payment service
provider or payment system operator;
(ii) owns or controls, directly or indirectly, including through
trusts or bearer shareholding for the payment service
provider or payment system operator, 25 percent or more
4 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 8308
		 of the shares or voting rights of the payment service
provider or payment system operator;
(iii) has the right, directly or indirectly, to appoint or remove
the majority of the board of directors of the payment service
provider or payment system operator;
(iv) has the power to materially influence the decision-making
or policy of the payment service provider or payment
system operator;
(v) despite less than 25 percent shareholding or voting rights,
derives economic benefits, including dividends, rights to
profit, enjoyment of assets of the payment service provider
or payment system operator or is able to use significant
assets of the payment service provider or payment system
operator, even if the person has no other formal link to the
payment service provider or payment system operator;
(vi) otherwise exercises control over the management of the
payment service provider or payment system operator in
his or her capacity as the executive officer, independent
non-executive director, director, manager or partner;
“Electronic money” means monetary value as represented by a claim on its issuer, which is –
(a) stored electronically, magnetically or digitally;
(b) issued on receipt of funds (legal tender) of an amount equivalent to the monetary
value issued;
(c) accepted as a means of payment by persons other than the issuer; and
(d) redeemable on demand for cash in Namibia Dollar;
“Electronic money issuer” means a payment service provider licensed or authorised to issue
electronic money;
“Payment facilitation services” means the act of holding onto funds when offering payment services
which includes switching, transmitting or processing payment instructions (including the delivery
to and/or receipt of payment instructions) between system participants and merchants or customers
and/or communicating transaction information between merchants, issuing banks, and the acquiring
bank, as well as providing infrastructure and platform which allows other payment service providers
to offer payment services;
“Payment facilitator” means a payment service provider that offers payment facilitation services;
“Payment instruction” means an order to make a payment or transfer funds;
“Payment instrument” means any device, procedure or a process licensed or authorised by the Bank
by which a payment instruction is issued for the purpose of obtaining money, making payments or
transferring funds;
“Payment services” means services relating to the facilitation of payment instructions, the issuance
and acquiring of payment instruments or electronic money and any other services incidental to
8308 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 5
executing payments or transferring of funds, as specified under the Schedule of the Act;
“Payment service provider” means a person, including a banking institution, licensed under the Act
to provide payment services as specified under the Schedule of the Act;
“Regulations” means the Regulations Relating to Fees Payable to the Bank of Namibia: Payment
System Management Act, 2023, as published in Government Gazette No. 8171, General Notice No.
252 dated 8 August 2023;
“Schedule” means the Schedule in the Act;
“Sponsoring bank” means a banking institution licensed in terms of the Banking Institutions Act,
2023, as amended, which the payment service provider has entered into an agreement with to offer
payment services;
“Third-party payment service providers” means a payment service provider that offers payment
services which includes the provision of technological services to facilitate switching, routing,
acquiring of payment instructions, payment transaction processing and the provision of gateway
services at merchant point of sale, electronic commerce platforms including mobile applications and
websites, without holding funds;
“user” means any person that uses a payment service in their capacity as a payer or a payee or both;
and
“virtual asset” means a digital representation of value –
(a) that can be digitally transferred, stored or traded;
(b) that uses a distribution ledger technology or similar technology; and
(c) can be used for payment or investment purposes,
but does not include digital representations of fiat currencies, and securities or other financial assets
regulated under the securities or financial assets law of Namibia.
4. Authorisation – Authority for the Bank to issue this Determination is provided for
under section 45 read with section 10(2) of the Act.
PART II: STATEMENT OF POLICY
5. Purpose – The purpose of this Determination is to provide the requirements for the
licensing and authorisation of payment service providers in Namibia.
6. The Position of the Bank – In line with international best practices, the Payment
System Management Act, 2023 introduced provisions whereby the National Payment System will
be overseen and regulated by a single regulator. The Act further introduces the concept of a single
term (payment service providers) in reference to all persons including banking institutions that will
be licensed or authorised by the Bank to offer payment services as defined in the Act. Section 10
of the Act provides that a person that intends to offer any of the payment services as set out in the
Schedule of the Act must apply to the Bank to be licensed as a payment service provider. It is the
Bank’s position that this Determination aims to provide the general and specific requirements for the
licensing and authorisation of payment service providers in the National Payment System.
6 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 8308
PART III: IMPLEMENTATION
7. Authorisation to offer payment services by banking institutions
7.1. A banking institution that has been granted a banking license or a provisional banking
license in terms of the Banking Institutions Act, 2023 (Act No. 13 of 2023), as amended,
may request for authorisation to offer one or more of the payment services listed in the
Schedule.
7.2. A banking institution that is currently not authorised to offer payment services and intends to
offer payment services must formally request for authorisation from the Bank.
7.3. Pursuant to 7.2, the formal request must be submitted at least three (3) months in advance to
the Bank and must be done in accordance with the Act and the specific requirements of the
payment services, as set out in this Determination and/or in any other relevant laws.
7.4. Subject to 7.3, a banking institution who intends to offer a payment service is required to
send a letter of intent to the Bank directed to the Director: National Payment System, which
states the intention to offer the payment service, accompanied by a business plan/model and
schematics of the envisaged payment service.
7.5. Once the request for authorisation has been assessed successfully, the applicant will be grant-
ed provisional authorisation accompanied by conditions that should be met within the three
(3) months period to obtain full authorisation.
7.6. The Bank may conduct an onsite pre-opening inspection, once the applicant has
communicated that it has successfully fulfilled the provisional authorisation conditions, to
test the applicant’s readiness to offer payment services.
7.7. Once all the conditions have been met, the applicant will be granted full authorisation to
offer payment services.
7.8. For purposes of this Determination and as defined in the Act, a banking institution authorised
to offer payment services will be referred to as a payment service provider and is required to
comply with all general requirements applicable to payment service providers.
8. Licensing process to offer payment services by non-bank financial institutions
8.1. A person that intends to offer a payment service as a non-bank financial institution must
formally apply to the Bank to be licensed as a payment service provider.
8.2. The application must comply with the relevant requirements to issue that specific payment
service as stipulated in the Act, this Determination and/or any other relevant laws.
8.3. The application must specify the category of payment service provider license the applicant
intends to obtain.
8.4. A non-bank financial institution may offer payment services listed in the Schedule of the Act,
under the following categories:
(a) a payment instrument issuer; and/or
(b) a payment facilitator; and/or
8308 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 7
(c) a third-party payment service providers; and/or
(d) a virtual assest service provider.
8.5. In pursuant to section 8.4, a non-bank financial institution may only submit one (1) application
at a time to the Bank to be licensed as a payment service provider, which application may
include the intention to offer one or more payment services.
8.6. An additional application by a non-bank financial institution to be authorised under any of
the categories stipulated under section 8.4 should be done after three (3) months from obtaining
full authorisation as a payment service provider.
8.7. Subject to 8.1, a person who intends to offer a payment service is required to send a letter
of intent to the Bank directed to the Director: National Payment System, which states the
intention to offer the payment service, accompanied by a business plan/model and
schematics of the envisaged payment service. The business plan should include the
following:
(a) Name of payment service product;
(b) Nature of the business;
(c) Features of the scheme, diagrammatic illustration of the system and transaction
flows;
(d) Security features that will be put in place;
(e) Project deployment plan (launching date and location etc.);
(f) 3-year financial projection for the company;
(g) Transactional charges and other fees that will be borne by the user; and
(h) Target market and market penetration strategies.
8.8 The Bank will peruse the submission and respond by either affording a meeting to the
applicant to discuss the intention and the way forward or provide guidance on how to submit
an application for assessment.
8.9. An initial application to be licensed as a non-banking financial institution must be accompa-
nied by the non-refundable application fee as prescribed in the Regulations.
8.10. Once the application has been assessed successfully, the applicant will be granted provisional
approval accompanied by conditions that should be met within a period of six (6) months in
order to be licensed as a payment service provider.
8.11. The Bank must conduct an onsite pre-opening inspection, once the applicant has
communicated that it has successfully fulfilled the provisional authorisation conditions, to
test the applicant’s readiness to offer the payment service.
8.12. Once all the conditions have been met and the onsite pre-opening inspection has been
successfully finalised, the applicant will be required to pay the license fee as provided by the
Bank in the Payment System Notice and then subsequently be licensed as a payment service
provider.
8.13. Pursuant to section 8.1 and section 8.4 and in accordance with section 10(4) of the Act, the
Bank will specify the category of payment services such a person is licensed to offer and
further stipulate the terms and conditions accompanying the license.
8 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 8308
8.14 The Bank will conduct due diligence before renewing the license of a payment service
provider.
9. Authorisation to offer payment services under an additional category
9.1. A payment service provider authorised or licensed to offer payment services in accordance
with the categories provided under section 8.4, and who intends to offer payment services
under an additional category under that section, must formally request for authorisation from
the Bank.
9.2. Pursuant to section 9.1, the formal request must be submitted at least three (3)
months in advance to the Bank and must be done in accordance with the Act and the specific
requirements to offer payment services under that specific category, as set out in this
Determination and/or in any other relevant laws.
9.3. Subject to section 9.1, a payment service provider who intends to offer a payment service
under an additional category is required to send a letter of intent to the Bank directed to the
Director: National Payment System, which states the intention to offer a payment service
under an additional category, accompanied by a business plan/model and schematics of the
envisaged payment service.
9.4. An application fee is not required for a request to offer payment services under that
additional category.
PART IV: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
10. Pursuant to section 8.1, non-bank financial institutions that intend to offer payment services
must submit to the Bank the following documents in terms of the General Requirements  ̶
10.1. Governance requirements
Governance
Requirements
10.1.1 A certified true copy of the memorandum and articles of association
and/or certificate of incorporation or business registration in Namibia,
including the contents of registration of directors, auditors, and officers
(CM29), company’s profile, organisation structure, organogram, and contact
details
10.1.2 Beneficial ownership information of all substantial shareholders in
the business including holding companies and subsidiaries of the business
in accordance with the definition of the beneficial owner
10.1.3 Certified copies of latest audited financial statements in respect of
existing companies whereas newly formed companies must submit a 3-year
pro forma financial statement and
10.1.4 Any approval, authorisation, license or permit from other regulatory
authorities.
10.2. Appointment of board of directors and executives
10.2.1 The names, addresses and identity documentation or passport
numbers, and contact details of the chief executive officer, executive
management, board of directors and substantial shareholders
10.2.2 Completed fitness and probity forms of all shareholders or those
with effective control of the company, and board of director comprising of:
8308 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 9
10.3. Risk management and mitigation requirements
Risk Management
and Mitigation
Requirements
10.3.1 A draft or final Risk Management Framework that includes the
systems, and controls explaining how the payment service provider will
identify, monitor, manage and report risks to which it can reasonably expect
to be exposed. These risks include:
(a) operational risk;
(b) outsourcing risk;
(c) fraud risk;
(d) money laundering, terrorism financing and financial crime risk;
(e) cyber security risk;
(f) reputational and legal risk;
(g) liquidity risk;
(h) credit risk;
(i) counterparty risk; and
(j) data protection and privacy risk
10.3.2 An assessment report showing the penetration security test results
to attest the robustness and safety of the payment service provider’s
applications, systems and IT infrastructure. The tests should be conducted
by an independent security expert
10.3.3 A structured vulnerability management plan to identify, prioritize,
mitigate, and track security vulnerabilities in the payment service provider’s
applications, systems, and IT infrastructure
10.3.4 Any document or information the Bank may deem necessary from
time-to-time.
Requirements for
appointment of
Executives and
Board of Directors
(a) PSF-001
(b) PSF-002-1
(c) PSF-002-1
(d) a declaration form;
(e) a police clearance or certificate of conduct from Namibia and/or
the country of present residence, which is not older than 6-months;
and
(f) a tax good standing certificate.
10.2.3 Comprehensive CV of the chief executive officer, executive
management and the board of directors clearly outlining the qualifica-
tions, expertise and competence to administer the affairs of the pay-
ment service provider
10.2.4 The Bank may interview board of directors and executives as part
of the fitness and probity assessment; and
10.2.5 Any document or information the Bank may deem necessary from
time-to-time.
10 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 8308
10.4 Consumer protection requirements
Requirements to
ensure Consumer
Protection
10.4.1 A draft or final consumer protection policy explaining how the
payment service provider will reduce the risk of fraud or other forms of
user abuse, including the following:
(a) clarification of the roles and responsibilities of the payment service
provider, agents, and users;
(b) sufficient and accessible information to users on their rights and
responsibilities; and
(c) a clear description of available payment services and the fees or charges
for using these services;
10.4.2 The draft written or electronic agreement entered into, with every
user for whom the payment service provider intends to offer payment
services to. The agreement should at minimum:
(a) include the identity of the user;
(b) provide clear guidance on the user’s right to redemption, including
conditions and fees for redemption; and
(c) include information on available redress procedures for complaints
together with the address and contact information of the payment
service provider; and
10.4.3 Any document or information the Bank may deem necessary from
time-to-time.
Contractual
Requirements
10.5.1 The draft or final agreements with third parties (technical partners,
banking institutions, service providers, merchants, mobile network operators
(MNO’s) and any other parties) that include the following:
(a) provisions that ensures compliance with section 14 of the Act;
(b) clarification of the roles, responsibilities, and contractual liabilities of
the parties to the contract;
(c) responsibilities of parties for providing and receiving information
regarding the payment service;
(d) materiality thresholds and procedures for notifying the users of service
disruptions, security threats, or other issues that create material risks;
(e) ownership and protection of user and transactional data;
(f) whether agents or service providers are required to obtain insurance
and/or provide guarantees;
(g) termination or expiration of contracts, including circumstances leading
to intervention by the payment service provider;
(h) business continuity measures;
(i) confidentiality clause such as non-disclosure agreements or confidential
agreements; and
10.5 Contractual requirements
8308 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 11
10.5 Contractual requirements
(j) the payment service provider’s right to monitor and audit operations
of agents, service providers, or third parties, security policies and
procedures, internal controls, and business continuity and contingency
plans; and
10.5.2 Any document or information the Bank may deem necessary from
time-to-time.
10.6 Capital requirements
Capital Adequacy
Requirements
10.6.1 At the time of licensing, a non-banking financial institution is
required to hold an initial capital amount as determined by the Bank in the
Payment System Notice.
10.6.2 The Bank reserves the right to waive this condition or impose such
further conditions as it deems necessary.
PART V: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR PAYMENT SERVICES
11. Specific requirements for payment instrument issuers:
11.1 In addition to the general requirements in section 10, an application to be licensed or
authorised as a payment service provider to offer a payment instrument must include:
11.1.1 the name, functionality and a detailed description of the designated payment
instrument, including payment flows and settlement arrangements;
11.1.2 rules and procedures setting out the rights and liabilities of the payment service
provider issuing the payment instrument and the user and the risks that the user may
incur, including the terms and conditions of use;
11.1.3 measures that ensure the safety, security and operational reliability of the designated
payment instrument including contingency arrangements;
11.1.4 evidence of the provision of payment settlement not more than 24 (twenty-four)
hours during business days after a payment instruction has been cleared;
11.1.5 evidence of whether the payment instrument will facilitate domestic or cross border
payments or both must be provided;
11.1.6 a technical plan on how the payment instrument will be interoperable in the National
Payment System;
11.1.7 evidence of whether the payment instrument will accommodate both on and off-line
services to its users; and
11.1.8 a complete audit trail or transaction processing cycle, including initiation, clearing,
settlement and payment finality.
12. Specific requirements for payment facilitators for purposes of facilitating payments or
transfers:
12.1 In addition to the general requirements in section 10 in this Determination, an application to
be licensed or authorised as a payment service provider to offer payment facilitation services
must include proof of the opening of a merchant bank account with one or more Namibian
12 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 8308
licensed banking institutions to pool funds for the purpose of providing payment facilitation
services.
12.2 A merchant bank account maintained for the purpose of offering payment facilitation services
is subject to the following conditions:
12.2.1 Funds held in a merchant bank account for the purpose of offering payment facilita-
tion services must not form part of the payment service provider’s assets or com-
ingled with the payment service provider’s own funds.
12.2.2 Funds held in the merchant bank account for the purpose of offering payment fa-
cilitation services must not be comingled with funds held in a trust account for the
issuance of electronic money as provided in section 22 of the Act.
12.2.3 Funds intermediated through a pool account must be paid over to a recipient to
whom the funds are due within two (2) business days from the date when the funds
were received by the payment service provider.
12.2.4 At all times, the aggregate value of the pooled funds must equal at least 100% of the
value of all outstanding liabilities. These funds must be reconciled on a daily basis,
with any deficiencies addressed within one (1) business day.
12.3 After the license or authorisation is granted, a payment facilitation service provider is further
required to maintain, at all times, an ongoing capital amount that is either in the form of cash
or other liquid assets equal to the average funds held in the merchant bank account.
12.2 A payment facilitator licensed or authorised by the Bank must satisfy the Bank that it has
implemented measures, controls, and procedures to safeguard the funds in the merchant bank
accounts as prescribed in subsection 12.2.
12.5 A payment facilitator must not give any other person access to the merchant bank accounts
through which payments or transfers to third persons are facilitated.
13. Specific requirements for third-party payment service providers:
13.1 In addition to the general requirements in section 10, an application to be licensed or
authorised as a third-party payment service provider must include, where applicable:
13.1.2 information in respect to user and/or merchants and the written mandate of the user
and/or merchant providing the payment instruction;
13.1.3 policies and procedures that ensure that the payment service which allow the
offsetting of mutual obligations by trading partners or persons for whom they are
processing payment instructions are prohibited;
13.1.4 evidence that the third-party payment service provider’s systems are operationally
and technically capable of offering the payment service;
13.1.5 evidence that the third-party payment service provider’s systems are interoperable
with the relevant banks and/or system operators;
13.1.6 attestation by the sponsoring bank(s) and/or system operator that the third-party
payment service provider has the capability to offer payment services through the
systems of the sponsoring bank(s) or system operator;
8308 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 13
13.1.7 attestation from the relevant card associations that the third-party payment service
provider has the necessary approval to facilitate payment instructions emanating
from payment instruments or payment systems of that card association;
13.1.8 attestation that the third-party payment service provider has obtained the relevant
certification to process payment instructions as well as to hold, store, and process
customer and transactional data; and
1.1.8 submit any other documents that the Bank may require to complete the application
assessment.
13.2 Banking institutions must not unreasonably and unduly deny sponsoring arrangements to
payment service providers, including access to their systems and payment channels, for purposes
of providing payment services.
14. Specific requirements for the issuance of virtual assets:
14.1 A person may not issue virtual assets for purposes of facilitating payments or transfers unless
such a person is duly licensed or authorised as a virtual assets service provider in accordance
with the Virtual Assets Act, 2023 (Act No. 10 of 2023).
14.2 A virtual assets service provider that intends to offer payment services must comply with the
provisions of the Act and the requirements set out in this Determination.
14.3 Subject to 14.2, the Bank may request for such additional information and documentation
necessary to ensure that the facilitation of payments or transfers using virtual assets is
conducted in accordance with the Act and the requirements in any other relevant laws.
PART VI: COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR PAYMENT SERVICE PROVIDERS
15. Compliance requirements for non-banking financial institutions
15.1 A non-bank financial institution must, three (3) months after its financial year end, submit
to the Bank annual audited financial statements prepared and signed off by a reputable
independent auditor.
15.2 A non-bank financial institution (already engaged in other business interests) that intends
to submit an application to offer payment services in addition to other services (not related
to payment services) must establish a separate entity whose activities will be limited to the
offering of payment services.
15.3 Pursuant to section 15.2 in this Determination, the Bank may consider a request for a waiver
from compliance with section 15.2, in exceptional circumstances. For the Bank to consider
such waiver, a non-bank financial institution must prove that:
(a) compliance with such a requirement would be unduly burdensome;
(b) the protection of user funds is not compromised; and
(c) granting a waiver would not compromise the Bank’s ability to effectively regulate and super-
vise the non-bank financial institution.
15.4 The board of a payment service provider must be established in accordance with the corporate
governance principles as outlined in the relevant national laws.
14 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 8308
15.5 A payment service provider’s board of directors must comprise of independent non-executive
directors, executive directors (including the principal officer/CEO/MD) and a chairperson of
the board who should be an independent non-executive director.
15.6 The composition of a payment service provider’s board of directors must have an equal
number of independent non-executive directors and executive directors, in addition to the
independent non-executive chairperson.
15.7 The principal officer/CEO/MD who serves as an executive director on the board of a
payment service provider, must be a Namibian citizen or a person residing in Namibia and
must be directly accessible to the Bank for consultation on matters of policy and day-to-day
operations of the payment service provider or controlling company.
15.8 A non-bank financial institution may not appoint or remove a board of director or CEO/MD
pricipal officer without written approval from the Bank.
15.9 At the time of licensing and any other time thereafter as the Bank may determine, a payment
service provider is required to submit to the Bank information relating to the beneficial
owners of the payment service provider as required by section 10(3) of the Act.
15.10 Beneficial ownership information of a payment service provider must satisfy the definition
of beneficial owner as provided in the Act.
15.11 A payment service provider may not commence operations until the Bank has finalised its
fitness and probity assessment and deemed the beneficial owners to be fit and proper.
15.12 A payment service provider may not appoint a board member official until the Bank has
finalised its fitness and probity assessment and deemed the board member official to be fit
and proper.
15.13 In pursuant to section 15.11 and 15.12, the Bank, within two (2) months of receiving the
fitness and probity application for approval, will conduct and finalise the assessment to
ensure that the beneficial owner or board member is fit and proper.
15.14 Each beneficial owner and person undertaking a key control function is required to comply
with the Bank’s fit and proper requirements.
15.15 A payment service provider must submit documentation demonstrating compliance with
these requirements and notify the Bank of any change or event that could reasonably be
considered to impact the state of such compliance.
16. General compliance requirements for all payment service providers
16.1 A payment service provider must put in place risk management policies, systems, and
controls for payment services.
16.2 A payment service provider must ensure that its risk management policies, systems, and
controls are kept up-to-date and ensure that copies of the updated policies and procedures are
submitted to the Bank for approval.
16.3 The policies, systems, and controls must take into account the types of activities performed
by the payment service provider, the nature, scale and complexity of its business model, any
operational challenges and the degree of risk associated with its operations.
8308 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 15
16.4 A payment service provider must ensure that the payment services offered, and systems
being used are sufficiently sound and resilient so as not to bring risk to the National Payment
System.
16.5 A payment service provider is required to provide the Bank with information management
procedures that ensure confidentiality of transactional and user data.
16.6 A payment service provider should, within six (6) months after commencing business,
establish a user care system to address the complaints of users.
16.7 A payment service provider should, prior to the establishment of a user care system provide
adequate means for users to file complaints which must be addressed within a period of
fifteen (15) days from receipt of the complaint.
16.8 Pursuant to section 16.7, complaints may be lodged in writing, but in each case must be
lodged within a period of ninety (90) days from the date of occurrence.
16.9 A payment service provider should acknowledge all complaints filed with them to the
complainant.
16.10 Where a complainant is not satisfied with a decision reached pursuant to a complaint, the
payment service provider should provide the complainant the option of pursuing an identified
escalation process by which the decision may be examined by a suitably qualified person in
the payment service provider’s organization.
16.11 Where a user raises a complaint in relation to an allegedly fraudulent payment transaction,
the payment service provider must handle such complaint in accordance with section 10.4 of
this Determination.
16.12 If the complaint contemplated in section 16.7 is submitted to the Bank, the payment service
provider must, if required by the Bank, provide evidence that the payment service provider’s
instructions or guidelines are in accordance with section 31 of the Act.
16.13 A payment service provider is liable for any fraudulent payment transaction, whether before
or after the user informs the payment service provider of any potential or suspected fraud,
except where:
(a) the user acts fraudulently; or
(b) the user acted negligently and did not take reasonable steps to keep safe its person-
alised security credentials.
16.14 A payment service provider that intends to appoint an agent must, at least sixty (60) days prior
to conducting the business of the payment service provider through an agency agreement,
submit:
(a) a copy of the standard agency agreement to the Bank in compliance with section 13
of the Act;
(b) the name, business registration documents and the contact information of the agent
to the Bank;
(c) a description of the services and technology to be used by the agent;
16 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 8308
(d) evidence of measures adopted to control money laundering and terrorist financing
through agents, including security measures to be adopted at the agent’s premises;
(e) a risk assessment report of the provision of payment services through the agents
including control measures that will be applied to mitigate the risks;
(f) a statement that the payment service provider has conducted appropriate due dili-
gence and has determined that the proposed agent:
(i) is fully compliant with all licensing requirements and all other relevant legal
and regulatory requirements;
(ii) is legally permitted to act as an agent;
(iii) has sufficient financial resources to effectively carry out the duties of an
agent;
(iv) has the technical knowledge to competently offer payment services and
comply with all legal requirements;
(v) is willing and able to meet all User Due Diligence requirements and comply
with the Financial Intelligence Act, 2012 (Act No.13 of 2012), as amended,
and its accompanying regulations;
(vi) possesses good moral character; and
(g) such other information or evidence as the Bank may request.
16.15 A payment service provider must, if applicable, on an annual basis within thirty (30) days
of the next calendar year (end of January of each year), submit to the Bank the following
completed table:
Table 1: Return: List of Agents
Number of
Agents
Name of
Agents
Location of
Agent
(City or
Town, and
Region)
Type of payment
services offered
on behalf of
payment service
provider
Status
(Active / Not
active)
Pool account
balances
(if any)
Values and
Volumes
1.
2.
3.
16.16 Payment service providers and their agents, on a regular basis, must conduct anti-money
laundering and financing of terrorism activities risk assessments and demonstrate compliance
with section 24 and 39 of the Financial Intelligence Act, 2012 (Act No.13 of 2012), as
amended, as well as other relevant accompanying regulations.
PART VII: ADDITIONAL REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
17. Request for approval of significant changes to payment services
17.1 A payment service provider is required to request approval from the Bank at least thirty (30)
days prior to proposed changes on the following aspects:
8308 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 17
17.1.1 A non-banking financial institutions’ intention to make any changes to the board of
directors.
17.1.2 A payment service provider’s intention to modify the terms and conditions of its
agreements with users.
17.1.3 A payment service provider’s intention to make changes to its fees and charges.
18. Notifications of significant changes to payment services
18.1 A payment service provider is required to notify the Bank on its intention to make any
significant changes to the scope or nature of its business model in terms of the licensed held
by the payment service provider.
19. Interoperability
19.1 A payment service provider may use systems capable of becoming interoperable with other
payment systems in the country and internationally.
19.2 A payment service provider is required to provide the Bank with a roadmap or technical plan
on how the systems used to provide payment services will become interoperable as guided
by the Bank’s Position Paper on Interoperability in the NPS, dated 2 August 2018.
20. Surrender of the licensing or authorisation to offer payment services
20.1 A payment service provider may surrender the license or authorisation to offer payment
services by formally notifying the Bank least three (3) months in advance of its intention
to surrender its license or authorisation to offer payment services and voluntarily cease
operation.
20.2 Where a payment service provider surrenders the license or authorisation to offer payment
services in terms of this Determination, the payment service provider must:
20.2.1 notify its users at least two (2) months prior to the surrender to allow users to retrieve
funds held;
20.2.2 provide the Bank with the entire database in a readable format and other relevant
information on the processing of payments to users;
20.2.3 submit a report on the distribution of funds held in the trust account, where applicable;
and
20.2.4 ensure that all due diligence processes are followed upon ceasing operation.
21. Suspension of the license or authorisation to offer payment services
21.1 The Bank may, by notice to a licensed or authorised payment service provider, suspend
an authorisation or license for such period as the Bank may specify, under the following
circumstances:
21.1.1 The payment service provider conducts business in a manner which is detrimental to
the stability of the National Payment System;
21.1.2 The payment service provider contravenes any of the provisions of the Act, this
Determination and other laws and regulations issued by the Bank;
18 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 8308
21.1.3 The payment service provider fails to offer payments services for a period of at least
twelve (12) consecutive months;
21.1.4 The payment service provider notifies the Bank that it intends to cease offering
payment services for which it is licensed or authorised;
21.15 The payment service provider no longer meets or, in the opinion of the Bank, is
unlikely to meet any of the requirements of the Act, this Determination and/or any
other relevant laws;
21.1.6 The payment service provider fails to inform the Bank, in accordance with section
17.1, of a change in circumstances which the Bank considers to be materially
relevant to its compliance with any of the requirements of this Determination
(including capital requirements);
21.1.7 The Bank considers that suspension is otherwise desirable in order to protect the
interests of users or is in the public interest; and
21.1.8 Any other circumstances that the Bank considers material to warrant suspension.
21.2 The Bank must follow the procedure below when suspending a payment service provider:
21.2.1 Before suspending the license or authorisation to offer payment services, the Bank
will notify the payment service provider of the reason for the suspension.
21.2.2 A payment service provider may, within thirty (30) business days from the date of
receipt of a notice referred in subsection 21.1, make written representations to the
Bank.
21.2.3 On receipt of the written representations, the Bank must consider the representations
made by the payment service provider, if any, before making a decision.
21.2.4 Once the Bank has made a decision as contemplated in subsection 21.2.3, the Bank
must –
(a) in writing, inform the payment service provider of its decision and the reasons
for such decision; and
(b) publish the suspension of the license or authorisation to offer payment services
in the manner determined by the Bank.
21.2.5 If the payment service provider does not make written representations within the
thirty (30) business days from the date of receipt of the written notice, the Bank
must, by written notice inform the payment service provider of the suspension of the
license or authorisation to offer payment services and publish such suspension in the
manner determined by the Bank.
21.2.6 The Bank must ensure that it has followed all due diligence processes before
suspending the license or authorisation to offer payment services of a payment
service provider.
22. Revocation of the license or authorisation to offer payment services
22.1 The Bank may, in accordance with section 10(5) of the Act, by notice to a payment
		 service provider, revoke a license or authorisation, under the following circumstances:
8308 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 19
22.1.1 The payment service provider has contravened the provisions of the Act or any other
law issued by the Bank;
22.1.2 The payment service provider fails to comply with this Determination and remedial
measures required by the Bank following an inspection of the affairs of the payment
service provider;
22.1.3 It is determined that a license or authorisation was obtained on the strength of
misrepresented, inaccurate or misleading information furnished to the Bank at the
time of application;
22.1.4 The scheme is considered not to be conducive to the national interest of Namibia;
22.1.5 The payment service provider ceases to operate for a period of twelve (12) months
or becomes insolvent; and/or
22.1.6 Any other circumstances that the Bank considers material to warrant revocation.
22.2 The Bank will follow the procedure below when revoking a license or authorisation of a
payment service provider:
22.2.1 Before revoking the license or authorisation to offer payment services, the Bank will
		 notify the payment service provider of the reason for the revocation.
22.2.2 A payment service provider may, within thirty (30) business days from the date of
receipt of a notice referred in subsection 22.1, make written representations to the
Bank.
22.2.3 On receipt of the written representations, the Bank must consider the representations
made by the payment service provider, if any, before making a decision.
22.2.4 Once the Bank has made a decision as contemplated in subsection 22.2.3, the Bank
must –
(a) in writing, inform the payment service provider of its decision and the reasons for
such decision; and
(b) publish the revocation of the license or authorisation to offer payment services in
the manner determined by the Bank.
22.2.5 If the payment service provider does not make written representations within the
thirty (30) business days from the date of receipt of the written notice, the Bank
must, by written notice inform the payment service provider of the revocation of the
license or authorisation to offer payment services and publish such revocation in the
manner determined by the Bank.
22.2.6 The Bank must ensure that it has followed all due diligence processes before the
revocation of the license or authorisation to offer payment services of a payment
service provider.
23. Reporting
23.1 Payment service providers are required to submit monthly statistics to the Bank using the
Payment Service Provider Returns as provided by the Bank.
20 Government Gazette 15 February 2024 8308
23.2 The statistics for the reporting month must reach the Bank within ten (10) days of the
following month. For example, statistics for October must reach the Bank before or on the
10th of November.
23.3 In order to ensure effective oversight of payment service providers, the Bank reserves the
right to inspect all records, data and other relevant information, whether in the possession of
the payment service provider or its agent, in compliance with section 33 of the Act.
24. Administrative penalties
24.1 Any person that contravenes or otherwise fails to comply with this Determination will be
subject to administrative penalties as provided under section 40 of the Act, and its relevant
laws.
25. Repeals
25.1 This Determination repeals and replaces the Determination on Issuing of a Payment
Instrument in Namibia (PSD-1) No.184 published on 29 June 2007, the Guidelines for
Electronic Money Issuers in Namibia, the Guidelines for Payment Intermediation Service
Providers in the National Payment System of Namibia, and the PAN Entry and Participation
Criteria for Authorisation to Act as a Service Provider in the National Payment System on
the effective date.
26. Effective date
26.1 This Determination will come into effect on the date of publication in the Gazette.
27. Enquiries
27.1 All enquiries related to this Determination may be forwarded to:
The Director
National Payment System Department
Bank of Namibia
P.O. Box 2882, Windhoek
Namibia
Email: assessments.npsd@bon.com.na
________________               GOVERNMENT GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA
N$6.00 WINDHOEK - 28 November 2019
CONTENTS
GENERAL NOTICE
No. 492 Determination under the Payment System Management Act, 2003 (Act No. 18 of 2003), as amended 1 ________________
 No. 7064
Page
  General Notice BANK OF NAMIBIA
 No. 492
2019
DETERMINATION UNDER THE PAYMENT SYSTEM MANAGEMENT ACT, 2003, AS AMENDED.
In my capacity as Governor of the Bank of Namibia (The Bank), and under the powers vested in the Bank by virtue of section 14 of the Payment System Management Act, 2003 (Act No. 18 of 2003), as amended, I hereby issue this Determination on Issuing of Electronic Money in Namibia (PSD-3), which Determination shall become effective on date of publication in the Gazette.
I. SHIIMI
GOVERNOR
BANK OF NAMIBIA Windhoek, 4 November 2019

2
Government Gazette 28 November 2019 7064
 Payment System Determination (PSD-3) DETERMINATION ON ISSUING ELECTRONIC MONEY IN NAMIBIA
PARAGRAPH
1. Short Title
2. Application
3. Definitions
4. Authorisation
5. Purpose
6. Scope
7. Position of the Bank
8. Application of the Act
Arrangement of Paragraphs PART I Preliminary
PART II Statement of Policy
PART III
Implementation and Specific Requirements
9. Authorisation to Issue Electronic Money in Namibia
10. General Conditions for Using Agents to Provide Electronic Money Services
11. Specific Requirements for Issuing Electronic Money in Namibia
12. Anti-Money Laundering & Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML / CFT)
13. Risk Management and Mitigation, Confidentiality and Real-Time Transactions
14. Customer Protection
15. Competition, Interoperability & Remittances
PART IV
Other Regulatory Requirements
16. Reporting, Oversight and Financial Statement Requirements
17. Suspension of Authorisation
18. Cancellation of Authorisation
19. Administrative Penalties
20. Repeal of PSD-3
21. General
22. Effective Date
23. Enquiries
PART I: PRELIMINARY
1. Short Title - Electronic Money Determination
2. Application - This Determination will apply to all persons who intend to issue electronic money (e-money) in Namibia in terms of Section 5 of the Payment System Management Act, 2003 (Act No.18 of 2003), as amended (the Act). Banking institutions and non-bank institutions who intend to issue e-money are required to do so in accordance with this Determination. Banking institutions and non-bank institutions that issue e-money will be collectively referred to as “e-money issuers”. All (new applicants and existing) e-money issuers will be subjected to an assessment process, based on this Determination, in order to ensure compliance with minimum requirements for issuing e-money in Namibia. All e-money issuers must be able to demonstrate their full compliance within six (6) months after issuance and publication of this Determination in the Government Gazette.
  
7064
Government Gazette 28 November 2019 3
 3.
Definitions - In this Determination, unless the context otherwise indicates, the words and expressions used herein will have the same meanings assigned to them in the Act and cognate expressions will have corresponding meanings:
3.1 “Act” means the Payment System Management Act, 2003 (Act No. 18 of 2003), as amended.
3.2 “Agent” means an entity appointed by an e-money issuer to perform certain e-money-related services on its behalf.
3.3 “Banking institution” means a public company authorised under the Banking Institutions Act, 1998 (Act No.2 of 1998), as amended.
3.4 “Customer” means an e-money user with whom the e-money issuer has a business relationship with, as required under the Financial Intelligence Act, 2012 (Act No. 13 of 2012);
3.5 “Customer Due Diligence” or “CDD” means actions taken by an e-money issuer to ensure that prospective and existing customers are properly identified, verified and that their financial activities are actively monitored, as required under the Financial Intelligence Act, 2012 (Act No.13 of 2012).
3.6 “Electronic money” or “e-money” means monetary value as represented by a claim on its issuer, that is:
a) Stored electronically;
b) Issued on receipt of funds;
c) Accepted as a means of payment by persons other than the issuer; and
d) Redeemable upon demand for cash in Namibia Dollar.
E-money can be issued through various access devices such as card-based products e.g. prepaid cards and electronic-based products e.g. via the internet, mobile phone or any other electronic device.
3.7 “Electronic money issuer” or “E-money issuer” refers collectively to a banking institution or a non-bank institution allowed to issue e-money under this Determination.
3.8 “E-money scheme” means the e-money operating systems, networks, servers, agreements and technical standards and rules.
3.9 “Electronic money wallet” or “e-money wallet or e-wallet” means an application software or device on which monetary value is stored and which allows the holder of the wallet to make electronic transactions. The wallet may be stored on the internet or devices such as a mobile phone or computer, or products such as pre-paid cards.
3.10 “Interoperability” means the technical compatibility that allows for different payment systems to connect with one another, thus enabling e-money products and services from different e-money issuers to interact and exchange information, which further enables a user of one e-money issuer’s scheme to send to or receive money from another user on a different e-money issuer’s scheme.
3.11 “Non-bank institution” refers broadly to any institution or person other than a licensed or registered banking institution that intends to or issues e-money.
3.12 “Outstanding electronic money liabilities” means the aggregate of all unredeemed
e-money funds held in individual wallets, business and agent wallets.
3.13 “PSMA E-Money Circular” means an operational circular issued by the Bank in
terms of the Act outlining further e-money operational requirements.
3.14 “PSMA E-Money Guidelines” means an operational guideline document issued by
the Bank in terms of the Act, outlining further e-money operational requirements.
3.15 “Remittances” means cross-border or domestic person-to-person transfers of
relatively low monetary value.
3.16 “Trust account” means an account under the control of an e-money issuer held at a
licensed banking institution for and on behalf of e-money users who have exchanged cash for e-money.
 
4 Government Gazette 28 November 2019 7064
 4. Authorisation - Authority for the Bank to issue this Determination is provided for by Section 14 of the Act.
PART II: STATEMENT OF POLICY
5. Purpose – The purpose of this Determination is to provide for the minimum requirements
that potential issuers of e-money must satisfy before issuing e-money in Namibia.
6. Scope – This Determination will apply to all persons (banking institutions and non-bank institutions) who intend to issue e-money in Namibia. No person may issue e-money other than an institution allowed or authorised under this Determination.
7. The Position of the Bank – It is the Bank’s position that this Determination aims to create an enabling and fair environment in which electronic money can be issued in a manner that is safe, efficient, secure and cost effective for the benefit of the National Payment System. Furthermore, the Determination aims to promote the availability and acceptance of e-money with the potential to increase financial inclusion and specifying necessary safeguards and controls to mitigate the risks associated with e-money schemes and ensuring consumer protection.
8. Application of the Act - Unless expressly stated otherwise, the provisions of the Act, as well as the related Determinations and Directives, Guidelines and Circulars, will apply to all e-money issuers.
PART III: IMPLEMENTATION
9. Authorisation to Issue Electronic Money in Namibia
9.1 Banking Institutions:
9.1.1 A banking institution that intends to issue e-money must formally notify the Bank, at least three (3) months in advance, of its intention to issue e-money, after which, the Bank will formally pronounce itself to such an intention. This is to ensure that e-money operations are in line and comply with the relevant standards of issuing e-money, as set in this Determination.
9.1.2 A banking institution’s notification must explain the nature and functionality of the proposed e-money operations including all information and / or supporting documentation as prescribed by the Bank in the PSMA E-money Guidelines.
9.1.3 A banking institution may not issue e-money until 9.1.1 is fulfilled.
9.2 Non-Bank Institutions:
9.2.1 A non-bank institution that intends to issue e-money must formally apply to the Bank for authorisation, which application must include all documents, data, or other information as prescribed in the PSMA E-money Guidelines.
9.2.2 The Bank will issue a non-bank institution with a license to issue e-money upon the applicant satisfying all the application requirements, which authorisation or a license to issue e-money may not be transferred from one entity to another without written approval by the Bank.
9.2.3 An application for authorisation must be accompanied by an application fee as prescribed in the PSMA E-money Circular and will irrespective of whether the application is granted or refused, not be refunded.
9.2.4 An authorised non-bank institution e-money issuer is required to pay an authorisation fee as prescribed in the PSMA E-money Circular.
      
7064
Government Gazette 28 November 2019 5
 9.2.5
A non-bank institution entity must, in respect of the authorisation to issue e-money, and before 31 January of each year, pay to the Bank the prescribed annual fees in respect of such a year.
The Bank may suspend or revoke a license of a non-bank institution under the circumstances outlined under section 17 and 18 of this Determination.
9.2.6
9.3 Additional Requirements for Non-Bank Institutions
9.3.1 A non-bank institution (already engaged in other business interests) that intends to submit an application to issue e-money in addition to other services (not related to e-money) must establish a separate entity whose activities will be limited to the issuance of e-money and the provision of related services i.e. value add services etc.
9.3.2 The Bank may consider a request for a waiver from the requirement 9.3.1 in exceptional circumstances. For the Bank to consider such waiver, a non-bank institution must prove that:
a) Compliance with such a requirement would be unduly burdensome;
b) The protection of the e-money user is not compromised; and
c) Granting a waiver would not compromise the Bank’s ability to effectively
supervise the non-bank e-money issuer.
9.4 Additional Limitations
9.4.1 Non-bank e-money issuers are not permitted to engage in banking business, as defined by the Banking Institutions Act, 1998 (Act No.2 of 1998), as amended, unless duly assessed and licensed to do so.
9.4.2 Non-bank e-money issuers are not permitted to act as payment service providers as defined in the Act, unless duly assessed and licensed to do so.
9.4.3 E-money customer funds may not be classified as deposits and e-money users may not be referred to as depositors by an e-money issuer.
9.5 Notification of Significant Changes to Electronic Money Services:
9.5.1 An e-money issuer must notify the Bank of its intention to make significant changes to the scope or nature of the e-money services provided.
9.5.2 Such a notification must be provided at least 60 days prior to the date on which the change is to take effect, after which, the Bank will respond to the notification within 30 days after receipt of the notification. Examples of significant changes include, but are not limited to the following –
a) Change in electronic delivery mechanism used to provide services;
b) Change in ownership or partnership / agent agreements;
c) Merger / acquisition with another or more e-money issuers;
d) A significant increase in transaction volume is recorded. For the purpose
of this provision a significant increase would be measured as a percentage value of the e-money issuers transaction volumes, which percentage will be published in a PSMA E-money Circular from time-to-time;
e) Appointment or acquiring of a new agent network.
9.5.3 A non-bank e-money issuer that intends to venture into other business interests
separate from issuing e-money must notify the Bank at least 60 days in advance, after which, the Bank will formally pronounce itself within 30 days on such an intention.
9.5.4 The e-money issuer may not proceed with the envisaged change(s) until it receives the Bank’s response.

6 Government Gazette 28 November 2019 7064
 10. General Conditions for using Agents to Provide Electronic Money Services
10.1 E-money issuers may offer any or all approved e-money services through agents acting on their behalf, provided that they –
10.1.1 Notify the Bank at least 60 days prior to appointing the agents. The notification
should include the due diligence done on the agents and written agency agreements that comply to the provisions of this Determination and the PSMA E-money Guidelines.
10.1.2 The Bank will respond to the notification of appointing agents within 30 days after receipt of such a notification.
10.1.3 Maintain a list of agents that stipulates their names, location, pool account balances, e-money volumes and values, which must be forwarded to the Bank on an annual basis.
10.2 E-money issuers will be held fully responsible and accountable for ensuring that their agents comply with all legal and regulatory requirements related to the provision of e-money services.
10.3 The Bank may, if not satisfied with the fitness and properness of an agent, instruct the e-money issuer to terminate or amend the agency agreement.
11. Specific Requirement to Issue Electronic Money in Namibia
11.1 Characteristics of E-Money: E-money issuers must ensure that e-money schemes abide to the following –
11.1.1 E-money wallets and transactions must be denominated in Namibia Dollar and e-money balances must be redeemed at par value.
11.1.2 E-money issuers may not pay interest to customers for funds held on e-money wallets, and any loyalty bonus or reward points that customers or agents may earn on an e-money wallet may not be converted into cash or e-money.
11.1.3 Customer funds held in electronic wallets will not be considered as “deposits” as defined in the Banking Institutions Act, 1998 (Act No.2 of 1998), as amended, and acceptance of customer funds by e-money issuers must not constitute deposit taking. Customer funds must be treated as “accounts payable” for accounting purposes.
11.1.4 E-money issuers are not permitted to offer credit or intermediate e-money customer funds.
11.1.5 E-money issuers will be subjected to transaction and balances limits as prescribed by the Financial Intelligence Centre.
11.2 Safe Storage of Customer Funds: In order to ensure that customer funds are protected against loss, e-money issuers must comply with the following requirements –
11.2.1 An e-money issuer must open and maintain a trust account with a banking institution
for the purpose of pooling funds received from customers and agents in exchange for
e-money issued.
11.2.2 E-money funds held in a trust account may not form part of an e-money issuer’s
assets or liabilities and may not be used to meet any debt obligation of the electronic
money issuer.
11.2.3 Funds in a trust account may not be comingled with the funds of any natural or legal
person other than the e-money users or agents on whose behalf the funds are held.
11.2.4 At all times, the aggregate value of the pooled funds must equal at least 100% of the value of all outstanding e-money liabilities. These funds must be reconciled on a
daily basis, with any deficiencies addressed within one (1) business day.
11.2.5 Except with respect to interest paid under the conditions described below, e-money pooled funds may only be used to fund customer and agent transactions, such as redemptions or other transactions that result in a net reduction in the value of
  outstanding e-money liabilities.

7064 Government Gazette 28 November 2019 7
 11.2.6 Every e-money issuer must, annually within 30 days of the next calendar year, furnish the Bank with proof of compliance to this section.
11.3 Interest Earned on Pooled Funds:
11.3.1 E-money issuers are permitted to earn interest on pooled funds. However, issuers
may only withdraw interest earned, or use interest to pay fees or charges related to the administration and maintenance of the e-money scheme, if the remaining aggregate value of the pooled funds would equal at least 100% of the value of all outstanding e-money liabilities.
11.3.2 Interest accrued from the trust account balances should be used to benefit the e-money scheme and thereby ensure that e-money fees and charges are in the public interest.
11.4 Unclaimed Funds and Dormant Wallets: This section provides procedures to be followed by e-money issuers for the treatment of dormant e-money wallets:
11.4.1 A customer’s e-money wallet must be considered dormant if it does not register
a transaction for a consecutive period of six (6) months. The transaction can be
initiated either by the customer or by a third party on the customer’s e-money wallet.
11.4.2 The concerned customer must be notified one (1) month before the 6-month period is reached that the e-money wallet will be considered dormant unless there is activity
on the wallet.
11.4.3 An e-money issuer may not charge any fees or interest on a dormant e-money wallet.
11.4.4 Funds in a dormant e-money wallet must not be intermediated or treated as income
by the e-money issuer.
11.4.5 Funds in an e-money wallet that is considered dormant, after a period of 6-months,
must be dealt with in the following manner –
a) If the customer is known and has a primary banking account with the
e-money issuer, the funds must be returned to the recipient’s primary
banking account; or
b) If the customer’s identity is known (Know Your Customer “KYC”) and has
no active banking account, the customer should be contacted and the full amount should be returned. In the event that the customer is deceased, funds in the e-money wallet should form part of the customer’s estate;
c) If the recipient of the e-money wallet is not known but the sender of the e-money is known by the e-money issuer, the funds should be returned to the sender; or
d) In the event that none of the above can be applied, the value of e-money funds in dormant wallets must be deposited immediately into a separate bank account and be kept for a period of three (3) years, after which it can be used to develop the e-money scheme. E-money issuers must report the balances of this account to the Bank prior to it being used to develop the e-money scheme, in line with the reporting requirements under section 11.4.6.
11.4.6 Termination and Reporting: Subsequent to the provisions in 11.4.5, an e-money issuer must terminate a dormant e-money wallet and indicate to the Bank in the monthly reporting return:
a) The number of dormant e-money wallets, including the cumulative value
on the dormant e-money wallets; and
b) The number of terminated e-money wallets, including the cumulative value
on those terminated dormant e-money wallets deposited into the separate bank account referred to under section 11.4.5(b).
11.5 Minimum Capital Requirements for Non-Bank E-money Issuers:
11.5.1 The purpose of requesting non-bank e-money issuers to have initial capital at the time of licensing and to maintain ongoing capital is to protect against liquidity

8
Government Gazette 28 November 2019 7064
 and insolvency risk. Non-bank e-money issuers are required to comply with the following initial and ongoing minimum capital requirements:
11.5.2 At the time of licensing, a non-bank e-money issuer is required to have an initial capital amount of N$1.5 million.
11.5.3 Non-bank e-money issuers are required to maintain ongoing capital, either in the form of cash or other liquid assets equal to the average of outstanding e-money liabilities, calculated over the previous six (6) months.
11.5.4 The liquid assets should remain unencumbered and may be in the form of cash balances or other recognised financial instruments at banking institutions (different from where the trust account is kept) or in the form of highly liquid assets such as short-term financial instruments issued by the Government, the Bank of Namibia or as may be approved by the Bank.
11.5.5 The Bank may, on application in writing and on good cause shown, in writing permit a non-bank e-money issuer to and for such limited period of time as the Bank may specify, have capital funds which are lower than the capital funds determined under 11.5.3.
12. Anti-Money Laundering & Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT)
12.1. E-money issuers and their agents, on a regular basis, must conduct money laundering and financing of terrorism activities risk assessments and demonstrate compliance with section 24 and 39 of the Financial Intelligence Act, 2012 (Act No.13 of 2012), as well as other relevant accompanying regulations.
13. Risk Management and Mitigation, Confidentiality and Real-Time Transactions
13.1 Risk Mitigation: E-money issuers must ensure that they put in place, risk mitigation measures and appropriate security policies to safeguard the integrity, authenticity and confidentiality of data and operating systems. E-money issuers must comply with the risk mitigation measures and security standards as may be prescribed in the PSMA E-money Guidelines.
13.2 Confidentiality: E-money issuers and their agents must ensure to maintain confidentiality of all documents and information pertaining to their customers at all times and may not, on any account and at any time, disclose directly or indirectly to any person, any matter or information relating to their customers unless legally authorised to do so.
13.3 Real-Time Transactions: To avoid settlement risk, all e-money transactions affecting the value held on an e-money wallet must be processed in real time with settlement occurring on a daily basis. E-money must be credited on the e-money wallet of a customer as soon as technically possible after money has been received by an e-money issuer or its agents; e-money must be debited from the e-money wallet of the payer before it is credited to the payee’s account, or immediately after if a short delay is technically required.
14. Customer Protection
14.1 E-money issuers are required to take steps to ensure that customers understand the services which they are using - including the inherent risks of using such services - and are protected from fraud and other forms of customer abuse in so far as reasonably possible.
 Initial Capital Requirement
   Ongoing Capital Requirement
   N$1.5 million
  Cash or liquid assets equivalent to the average of outstanding e-money liabilities calculated over the previous six (6) months.
    
7064 Government Gazette 28 November 2019 9
 14.2 E-money issuers are directed to ensure that customers benefit from the provisions of 11.3.2 with regards to fees and charges associated with e-money services. The Bank reserves the right to set standards for these fees and charges as per the Act.
14.3 All fees and charges related to e-money services should be transparently displayed in the e-money issuers’ outlets, transacting platforms, banking halls and websites, and should not be misleading or bundled, so as to ensure customers pay exactly the price that is publicly displayed.
14.4 An e-money issuer must display, at all its premises and those of its agents, information on how customers can bring disputes and complaints to the attention of the e-money issuer, including providing contact details or other accessible methods for expeditious resolution of disputes.
14.5 The Bank may further prescribe, in the PSMA E-money Guidelines, specific requirements in respect to disclosure and customer protection and customer data privacy principles.
15. Competition, Interoperability and Remittances
15.1 Competition and Exclusivity: An e-money issuer and its agents may not engage in anti- competitive practices and exclusive contracts, arrangements or dealings that would hinder competition in the National Payment System. Any anti-competitive practices or unfair treatment in the NPS should be reported to the Bank for investigation.
15.2 Interoperability: In its efforts to achieve full interoperability in the NPS, the Bank will consider mandating interoperability through the issuance of a regulation in line with the Bank’s position on interoperability and as per the stipulations therein.
15.3 Remittances: E-money issuers that wish to provide regional cross-border e-money/ remittance services are only permitted to do so with written approval from the Bank.
16. Reporting, Oversight and Financial Statements Requirements
16.1.1 Reporting:
a) An e-money issuer must submit reports as prescribed by the Bank.
b) The statistics should include total interest accrued on the trust account and
attestation that the total pooled funds in the trust account are at least equal to the value of all outstanding e-money liabilities.
16.2 Oversight: In order to ensure that it is able to effectively oversee e-money issuers, the Bank reserves the right to inspect all e-money-related records, data, or other relevant information, whether in the possession of the e-money issuer or its agent.
16.3 Financial Statements: With the exception of a banking institution, a non-bank e-money issuer must, three (3) months after its financial year end, submit to the Bank annual audited financial statements prepared and signed off by a reputable independent auditor.
17. Suspension of the Authorisation -
17.1 The Bank may suspend an authorisation to issue e-money under any of the following circumstances where:
17.1.1 The e-money issuer is carrying on business in a manner which is detrimental to the stability of the National Payment System, or is incapable of providing services as per agreed service level standards; and / or
   
10 Government Gazette 28 November 2019 7064
 17.1.2 There is a violation of any of the provisions of this Determination or any other applicable laws or regulations; and / or any other circumstances which the Bank may consider material to warrant suspension.
17.2 The Bank will ensure that all due diligence processes are followed before suspension of an e-money issuer is instituted.
18. Cancellation of the Authorisation -
18.1 The Bank may cancel an authorisation to issue e-money under the following circumstances:
18.1.1 The e-money issuer fails to comply with this Determination and with remedial measures required by the Bank following an inspection of the affairs of the e-money issuer;
18.1.2 It is determined that an authorisation was obtained on the strength of misrepresented, inaccurate, or misleading information furnished to the Bank at the time of application;
18.1.3 There is a violation of any of the provisions of this Determination, the Act or any
other applicable laws or regulations;
18.1.4 The scheme is considered not to be conducive to the national interest of Namibia;
18.1.5 The e-money issuer ceases to operate or becomes insolvent; and / or
18.1.6 Any other circumstances which the Bank may consider material to warrant
cancellation.
18.2 The Bank will ensure that all due diligence processes are followed before cancellation of an authorisation to issue e-money is instituted.
19. Administrative Penalties - An e-money issuer that contravenes or otherwise fails to comply with this Determination will be subjected to administrative penalties as provided under the Act.
20. Repeal of PSD-3 - This Determination repeals and replaces the Determination on Issuing Electronic Money Namibia (PSD-3), published under General Notice No. 667, in the Government Gazette No. 6768 issued on 16 November 2018.
21. General - This Determination is not exhaustive and may be supplemented and / or amended from time-to-time.
22. Effective Date - This Determination will become effective on the date of publication in the Gazette.
23. Enquiries - All enquiries related to this Determination must be forwarded to:
Director: Payment and Settlement Systems Bank of Namibia
P.O. Box 2882
71 Robert Mugabe Avenue
      Tel: +264-61-2835111
________________
               GOVERNMENT GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA
N$8.00 WINDHOEK - 21 December 2022
CONTENTS
GENERAL NOTICE
No. 737 Determination Under the Payment System Management Act, 2003 (Act No. 18 of 2003), as Amended ...... 1 ________________
 No. 7984
Page
  General Notice BANK OF NAMIBIA
 No. 737
2022
DETERMINATION UNDER THE PAYMENT SYSTEM MANAGEMENT ACT, 2003 (ACT NO. 18 OF 2003), AS AMENDED
In my capacity as Governor of the Bank of Namibia (The Bank), and under the powers vested in the Bank under Section 14 of the Payment System Management Act, 2003 (Act No. 18 of 2003), as amended, I hereby issue this Determination of the Operational and Cybersecurity Standards within the National Payment System (PSD-12). This Determination becomes effective on 1 July 2023.
J. !GAWAXAB
GOVERNOR
BANK OF NAMIBIA Windhoek, 12 December 2022

2
Government Gazette 21 December 2022 7984
 Payment System Determination (PSD-12)
DETERMINATION OF THE OPERATIONAL AND CYBERSECURITY STANDARDS WITHIN THE NATIONAL PAYMENT SYSTEM
Arrangement of Paragraphs
PART I PRELIMINARY
PART II STATEMENT OF POLICY
PARAGRAPH
1. Short Title
2. Application
3. Definitions
4. Authorisation
5. Purpose
6. Scope
7. Position of the Bank
8. Application of the Act
PART III
IMPLEMENTATION AND SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
9. Governance - Role of the Board and Senior Management
10. Framework
11. Vulnerability Management – Identification, Protection, Detection, Response and Recovery
12. Safety Standards
13. Risk-Based Risk Indicators and Tolerance Levels
PART IV
OTHER REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
14. Oversight
15. Administrative Penalties
16. Effective date
17. Enquiries
PART I: PRELIMINARY
1. Short Title – Operational and Cybersecurity Standards within National Payment System
(NPS)
2. Application – This Determination shall apply to all persons within the NPS.
3. Definitions – In this Determination, unless the context otherwise indicates, the words and expressions used herein shall have the same meaning assigned to them in the Payment System Management Act, 2003 (Act No. 18 of 2003), as amended and cognate expressions shall have corresponding meanings:
   
7984
Government Gazette 21 December 2022 3
 3.1. 3.2. 3.3. 3.4.
3.5.
3.6. 3.7.
3.8. 3.9.
3.10.
3.11. 3.12.
3.13. 3.14.
3.15.
“Act” means the Payment System Management Act, 2003 (Act No. 18 of 2003), as amended.
“Availability” means the status of being accessible and usable as expected upon demand.
“Availability loss” means all events that stop planned production for an appreciable amount of time, in minutes.
“Critical operations” means activity, function, process, or service, the loss of which, would affect the continued operation of the NPS, its customers and/or the broader financial system.
“Critical systems” means all systems required for the efficient and effective operation of the National Payment System as per the following levels:
1. Financial Market Infrastructures (FMIs).
2. Interoperable Retail Payment Systems such as Payment Card, Electronic Fund Transfers (EFT), Electronic-Money (E-money) and any payment activity as may be authorised or designated by the Bank.
“Cyber” means the interconnected information infrastructure of interactions among persons, processes, data, and information and communications technologies, along with the environment and conditions that influence those interactions.
“Cyberattack” means the use of an exploit by an adversary to take advantage of weakness(es) with the intent of achieving an adverse effect on an information communication technology environment, which results in financial and data loss.
“Cybersecurity or resilience” means the ability to anticipate, withstand, contain and rapidly recover from a cyberattack.
“Cyber Risk” means the combination of the probability of an event occurring within the realm of an applicable entity’s information assets, computer and communication resources and the consequences of that event for an entity.
“Data in use” means data actively being used across the network or temporarily residing in memory, or any data not currently “inactive”.
“Data in motion” means data that is actively moving across devices and networks. “Data at rest” means data that has reached a destination and is not being accessed
or used.
“Encryption” means the process of converting information or data into a code which is only accessible with a defined digital key, to prevent unauthorized access.
“Framework” means the policies, procedures and controls established to identify, protect, detect, respond to and recover from the plausible sources of cyber risks in terms of this Determination.
“Identification” means to develop the organisational understanding required to manage cyber risk to systems, assets, data and capabilities.

4
Government Gazette 21 December 2022 7984
 3.16. 3.17. 3.18.
3.19.
3.20.
3.21. 3.22.
3.23. 3.24.
3.25. 3.26.
3.27.
3.28. 3.29.
“Information Asset” means any piece of data, device or other components of the environment that supports information-related activities.
“Integrity” means the status of not having been modified or destroyed in an unauthorised manner.
“National Payment System (NPS)” means the payment system as a whole, and includes any payment system, settlement system, clearing systems and payment system arrangement used in the process of effecting payment between payers and beneficiaries.
“Masking” means the obfuscation or hiding of information and data using modified content like characters or numbers, with the objective of creating an alternate version of information or data that cannot be easily identifiable or reverse-engineered, protecting data classified as sensitive.
“Operational Resilience” means the ability to maintain essential operational capabilities under adverse conditions or stress, even if in a degraded or debilitat- ed state; and recover to effective operational capability in a time frame and state consistent with this Determination.”
“Risk indicator” means an occurrence or sign which reveals that an incident or something may have occurred or be in progress. For example, ‘system uptime or availability is a risk indicator.
“Recovery Point Objective” means the amount of time between a disaster occur- ring and an institution’s most recent backup or the maximum acceptable amount of data loss after an unplanned data loss incident expressed as an amount of time.
“Recovery Time Objective” means the longest acceptable length of time that a computer, system, network, or application can be down after a disaster happens.
“Respond” means to develop and implement appropriate activities to be able to take action when it detects a cyber event.
“Person” means a natural or juristic person.
“Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMI)” are international standards for financial market infrastructures, i.e. payment systems, central securities depositories, securities settlement systems, central counterparties and trade repositories, issued by the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) and the International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS).
“Protect” means the development and implementation of appropriate safeguards, controls and measures to enable the reliable delivery of critical infrastructure services.
“Successful attack” means the gaining of access by threat actors, who try to gain unauthorized access, steal data or cause damage to various computing systems.
“Tolerance level” means the specified level of risk to be tolerated by a Board and / or Senior Management or the Bank of Namibia. For example, 2 hours up time or availability is a tolerance level.

7984
Government Gazette 21 December 2022 5
 3.30. “Tokenisation” means a process by which sensitive information and data elements are replaced by dynamic tokens of no intrinsic value, to prevent unauthorised access.
3.31. “Two-factor authentication” means a two-step verification method which provides users with two different authentication factors to verify themselves.
3.32. “Vulnerability” means a weakness, susceptibility or flaw in a system that an attacker can access and exploit to compromise system security. The vulnerability arises from the confluence of three elements: the presence of susceptibility or flaw in a system; an attacker’s access to that flaw; and an attacker’s capability to exploit the flaw.
4.
PART II: STATEMENT OF POLICY
Authorisation – Authority for the Bank to issue this Determination is provided in section 14 of the Act.
 5. Purpose – This Determination provides the principles and key risk indicators for the risk management of cyber security and operational resilience in the National Payment System.
6. Scope –This Determination applies to all Financial Market Infrastructures (FMIs), Designated Non-Bank Financial Institutions (NBFIs), participants of FMIs, Retail Payment Systems (such as electronic funds transfers, payment card, electronic-money etc.), Payment Service Providers (PSPs) and any other entities licensed or authorised within the National Payment System, including participants in the Financial Technology (FinTech) Regulatory Framework of the Bank.
7. Position of the Bank – The advent of digital transformation and the rising prominence of digital payments poses an increased risk of cyberattacks, which further poses a significant threat to financial stability. The Bank understands that cyberattacks will happen. Therefore, it is imperative for financial institutions to proactively implement and manage controls for enhanced cybersecurity and planned response.
Cyberattacks can threaten financial stability by disrupting interconnected operational networks and their critical nodes, which affects operational resilience. If operational resilience is not properly managed within the NPS, FMIs and other key stakeholders within the NPS can be sources of financial shocks and a major channel through which these shocks are transmitted across domestic and international financial markets.
The above can create vulnerabilities which can result in the loss of data and the fraudulent loss of money, which can lead to the collapse of the financial system. Thus, the regulation of cybersecurity and operational resilience is dutiful to the achievement of one of the Bank’s mandate in section 2 (1) of the Act, i.e. to ensure the safe, secure, efficient and cost-effective operation of the NPS.
8. Application of the Act – Unless expressly stated otherwise, the provisions of the Act, as well as the related Determinations, Guidelines and Directives, shall apply to all persons within the National Payment System.
PART III: OPERATIONAL AND CYBERSECURITY STANDARDS 9. Governance - Role of the Board and Senior Management
9.1. The Boards of the entities to which this Determination applies are responsible for information security, cybersecurity and operational resilience and must establish and approve a Framework in respect thereof.
     
6
Government Gazette 21 December 2022 7984
   10.
9.2. The Framework must be defined and continuously adapted to the organisation’s strategic objectives.
9.3. The Board must set and approve risk tolerances which are aligned with the key risk indicators contemplated in section 13 of this Determination.
9.4. The Board must be apprised periodically, at least four (4) times in a year, of the risk profile in terms of this Determination to ensure that it remains consistent with the risk tolerances as contemplated in section 9.3 of this Determination.
9.5. The Board must ensure participation in industry-wide collaborative efforts to effectively respond to and recover from cyberattacks within the financial system as a whole.
9.6. The Board may delegate the implementation of this Determination to Senior Management.
9.7. The Board must ensure segregation of duties between itself, as the body responsible for the governance of information security, cybersecurity and operational resilience and the person(s) i.e., security officer(s), within an entity responsible for the implementation of information security, cybersecurity and operational resilience.
9.8. The security officer(s) contemplated in section 9.7 of this Determination must-have reporting access to the Board.
Framework
10.1. The Framework must clearly determine information security, cybersecurity and
operational resilience objectives, and tolerances.
10.2. The Framework must, at a minimum, include measures of identification, protection, detection, response and recovery as contemplated in section 11 of this Determination.
10.3. The Framework must clearly define the roles and responsibilities for managing information security, cybersecurity and operational resilience, including in emergencies and in a crisis.
10.4. The Framework must be reviewed and updated periodically to ensure that it remains relevant.
10.5. The strategies and measures in the Framework must cover people, processes, and technology as well as measures for information security as they relate to data in use, data at rest and data in motion.
10.6. The adequacy of and adherence to the Framework must be internally assessed and measured periodically through independent compliance programmes and audits.
Vulnerability Management – Identification, Protection, Detection, Response and Recovery
Identification
11.1. There must be an identification of business functions and supporting processes and a risk assessment performed, at least once every year, or when there is a significant change that affects business functions or processes, to ensure an understanding of the importance of each business function and supporting processes, and their interdependencies within the NPS.
      11.
   
7984
Government Gazette 21 December 2022 7
 11.2. 11.3.
The identified business functions and supporting processes must be classified in terms of criticality, which in turn must guide the prioritisation of its protective, detective, response and recovery efforts.
Pursuant to section 11.11, there must be threat intelligence processes to identify threats, vulnerabilities and payment fraud that the entity could be exposed to, including but not limited to one penetration testing every three years for critical systems.
Protection
11.4. Appropriate protective controls must be implemented in line with best practice standards to minimise the likelihood and impact of a successful cyberattack on identified critical business functions, information assets and data.
11.5. Agreements with third parties for relevant outsourcing arrangements and critical IT service providers must include the provision for safeguarding the entity’s information and data and operational resilience objectives.
Detection
11.6. Capabilities must be established to continuously monitor and detect anomalous cyber activities and events, including the monitoring of all payments for the detection of any fraudulent or suspicious activities.
Response and Recovery
11.7. Upon detection of a successful cyberattack or fraudulent payment transaction as a result of a successful cyber-attack, an investigation must be performed to determine the nature, extent and damage inflicted.
11.8. While the investigation is ongoing, actions must be taken to contain the situation to prevent further damage and commence recovery efforts to restore operations or redress the fraudulent payment transaction based on the response planning.
11.9. An entity must design and periodically test its payment systems and processes to enable the safe resumption of critical operations within two (2) hours of a disruption.
11.10. Notwithstanding this capability to resume critical operations within two (2) hours, reasonable judgment must be exercised in effecting resumption so that risks do not escalate while taking into account the completion of settlement within the NPS by the end of each business day.
11.11. An entity must develop scenarios and test response, resumption, and recovery plans at least twice every year for critical systems. The aforesaid test response, resumption, and recovery plans must support objectives to protect and, if necessary, re-establish the integrity and availability of its operations and the confidentiality of its information assets, at a recovery point objective of at least 5 minutes.
11.12. An entity must consult and coordinate with relevant internal and external stakeholders during the establishment of its response, resumption, and recovery plans.
11.13. All successful cyberattack incidents must be reported to the Bank, at least within 24 hours for the preliminary notification of the cyber incident.
   
8
Government Gazette 21 December 2022 7984
 11.14.
After the completion of the reporting contemplated in section 11.13, the entity is required to conduct an impact assessment on the successful cyberattack incident and report to the Bank within a month from the time the incident becomes known.
11.15.
12. Safety Standards
The reporting required in section 11.14 must at least indicate any financial loss, data loss and availability loss.
 12.1. Encryption or tokenization or masking of transmission of data across open and public networks is required in line with best practice encryption or tokenization or masking standards.
12.2. Prior to the effecting of any payment transaction during payment initiation on a payment instrument, website, and mobile application, two-factor authentication must be required. This means two-factor authentication is required for every payment.
12.3. The Bank may require the implementation of best practice standards from time to time.
13. Risk-Based Risk Indicators and Tolerance Levels
13.1. The entity is required, at a minimum, to consider and adhere to the following risk indicators and tolerance levels for the efficient, effective, and safe operation of the NPS.
  Risk Indicator
  Tolerance Level
  Uptime or Availability of Critical Systems Recovery Time Objective
Recovery Point Objective of Critical Systems Test response, resumption, and recovery plans
99.9%
Within two (2) hours
5 minutes
Two successful tests in a year
        14. Oversight – The Bank may inspect all records, data, or other relevant information to ensure compliance with this Determination.
15. Administrative Penalties – Any person that contravenes or otherwise fails to comply with any provisions of this Determination will be subjected to administrative penalties as provided for under the Act.
16. Effective Date – This Determination becomes effective on 01 July 2023.
17. Enquiries – All enquiries related to this Determination must be directed to:
The Director: National Payment System Bank of Namibia
P.O. Box 2882
Windhoek
                                ________________
    